---
layout: page
title: ""
---

# Who am I?

My bachelor project choice was an easy decision. Among photonics and optoelectronics, advanced materials, instrumentation, theoretical and computational physics seemed to be the area that suited me the most by far. I have always had an interest in challenging my capabilities. My project submitted as "Numerical study of heat conduction in a bar (1D)" allowed me to combine my analytical and numerical skills. The heat propagation equation was deducted and implemented in MatLab using implicit/explicit Euler and Crank-Nicolson methods for several boundary conditions and materials. 

In my masters, I knew I would like to continue into the branch of theoretical and computational physics. Density functional theory (DFT) tools, such as the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) and the Munich SPR-KKR code, were employed to calculate microscopic properties relevant to the study of magnetic materials. The ultimate goal was to perform simulations of magnetic systems based on transition metals such as simple cubic, body-centered cubic, face-centered cubic and with the possibility of modeling Heusler compounds. With the estimated exchange energies, Monte Carlo methods would allow the estimation of critical thermodynamic properties. However, as I was not familiar with the UNIX environment neither density functional theory, it took me a while to get used to it. Moving forward from density functional theory to Monte Carlo calculations in MatLab was no more an option. Consequently, I had to readjust the initial work plan.  This setback gave me an excellent opportunity not only to explore DFT but also VASP at deeper. I had time to perform convergence studies (cutoff energies and k-points) and test different functionals, pseudopotentials, crystal structures and magnetic properties of Fe, Co and Ni. As experimental properties are known, these kinds of calculations were helpful to get started. My supervisors always encouraged me to explore the theory and packages available. Beyond computational resources, I had access to several scripts in python and C. However, I wrote my scripts in MatLab even when libraries and tools were available,  such as Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) to determine the Birch-Murnaghan equation coefficients. Despite external calculations written in MatLab, the research group recommended shell scripting to automate a set of computations such as structural optimization no matter the tool employed. Advice accepted and followed, the evolution of the Curie temperature of the Fe$_2$MnSi$_{1-x}$Ge$_x$ system was studied computationally. Computational tools were employed to gain insight into the Curie Temperature (T$_{C}$) versus Ge content (x) behaviour, separating the structural contribution (change in lattice parameters) from the chemical contribution (solid solution composition). The computational results were then compared to recent experimental work from the group of prof. Mario Reis from Institute of Physics, Fluminense Federal University recently published in Journal of Alloys and Compounds 893 (2021) 162236.

During the time I was working on my master dissertation, the opportunity to apply for a research grant for bachelor holders, within the scope of the FCT project entitled "PORTUGAL at ISOLDE: Research in Materials Physics and Nuclear with Isotopes and Radioactive Techniques" (CERN/FIS-PAR/0005/2017). The project allowed me to expand my knowledge of density of states and band structures. Hexagonal and orthorhombic LuFeO$_3$ experimental structures, as well as Lu$_3$Fe$_5$O$_{12}$ experimental compound, were the targets of the calculations. Besides calculations, the physics of hyperfine interactions and the experimental methods that make use of hyperfine interactions were studied in the widely distributed online course of professor Stefaan Cottenier. This project allowed me to explore a high-throughput density functional theory branch exploring the values of the Hubbard and Hund parameter and verifying their agreement with experimental band gaps.

% multifunctional ferroic ceramics and nanostructures 

Computer simulations and multiscale modeling of ceramics and multifunctional ferroic nanostructures allowed me not only to strengthen my physical domain, but also to expand my knowledge about computational resources and their limits. The time consumption optimization of those calculations with 8 or 16 CPU's cores or Random Access Memory overhead started to trigger me into developing more curiosity which I had not when I was studiyng electrical circuits, electronics, electronic instrumentation for physics, optoelectronics, previously in my course. Although I preciously had to use the Arduino IDE to blink LEDs or build an oximeter in optoelectronics never got me so excited about embedded systems. However the development of problem solving personality into learning shell scripting, python and bit of C and C++, challenging constantly my boundaries and building bridges between the knowledge aquired in the past is what drives me the most.

After finishing my Masters, I gained even more interest in studying technologies such as hydrogen storage solutions, CO$_2$ capture, batteries and electronic devices like solid state diodes, MOSFETs or TJBs and their electrical, magnetic, elastic properties, etc. that play a vital role in the devices we take for granted today. 
